Create 2026-06-24-multiple-branches-usability-testing-findings-june-2… (#261)
alphagov/forms: research/2026-06-24-multiple-branches-usability-testing-findings-june-2026.md

# Multiple branches usability testing June 2026

> ## 2060-06-16 / Sprint 5 (Q1)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## 2026-06-16 / Sprint 5 (Q1)
```

## Aims
- To understand how usable the design is.
- To find out whether a longer or more complex form might present additional challenges.
- To uncover any challenges the design might present for users who have cognitive or neurodivergent conditions.

Can people easily: 
- Add routes
- Edit routes
- Reorder questions and understand the impact
- Fix routes that have issues
- Understand what routing is in place in a form
- Navigate, use and understand a long routes page

## Participants
- 8 civil servants
- Current users of GOV.UK Forms
- Intention: A range of experience of the platform and using routing
- Actual: More beginners than experienced users

- 4 **had** a declared a cognitive or neurodivergent condition
- 4 had **not** declared a cognitive or neurodivergent condition

## Methodology
- Usability tests with form creators.
- 60 minute sessions.

## Key Headlines 

### Adding the questions

> People work from a range of formats when creating their forms

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- People work from a range of formats when creating their forms
```

> Half of people set up the question wrongly. Most commonly, they set up the list question to accept one or more options.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Half of people set up the question wrongly. Most commonly, they set up the list question to accept one or more options.
```

### Finding where to add routes

> More than half of participants struggled to find where or how to add routes, for these reasons:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
More than half of participants struggled to find where or how to add routes. They:
```

Only because when I first read this it seemed like the list was going to be the results of them not being able to add routes rather than the main reasons why they struggled to add routes.

> - They couldn’t find the ‘Edit question routes’ button

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- couldn’t find the ‘Edit question routes’ button
```

> - They didn't the empty routes page shown when they needed to add more questions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- didn't read the content on the empty routes page that said they needed to add more questions
```
Is this what this meant? I'm not sure!

> - They didn't understand why their options were not shown on the routes page because they set the question up to accept more than one option

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- didn't understand why their options were not shown on the routes page (when they'd set the question up to accept more than one option)
```

When searching for how to add routes, people often went to the Edit question link.
They would usually focus on the options area of the edit question page, or go into editing the options.

### Adding routes

> Once on the Edit routes page, if the questions were set up correctly, they understood how it worked.They generally used the dropdowns to change the options quite easily.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once on the Edit routes page, if the questions were set up correctly, they understood how it worked. They generally used the dropdowns to change the options quite easily.
```

However, people commented on the amount of stuff on the page making it more difficult, especially text and numbers.

### The length of the form

Most people did not seem to find the longer form more difficult to use.

### Reordering questions and editing / fixing routes

Those who did the task understood what they needed to do when they saw the error for the backwards route.

Again, the amount of numbers and text on the page made the task more difficult.

### Understand what routing is in place in a form

Those who used the route descriptions seemed able to understand them with a bit of focus.

> There seemed to be potentially a challenge when how the route is written in the original form is structured differently to the platform.

Reviewer: Think this needs a new line? otherwise it merges into one paragraph. 

Also not sure what this line is saying. Is this about how the description was structured slightly differently to how the routes page structured things? (ie: it ordered the routes by the target question rather than in the order of the options in the list?)

> There seemed to be potentially a challenge when how the route is written in the original form is structured differently to the platform.

Reviewer: duplicate sentence?

### Using the keyboard to navigate (one participant)

They were the only person who seemed very nervous about making mistakes.

> They were keen to be able to edit the routes for just one question at a time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

They were keen to be able to edit the routes for just one question at a time.
```

> Their main limitation is scrolling the page while also using the keyboard to interact with the page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Their main limitation was scrolling the page while also using the keyboard to interact with the page.
```

> ### Impact for people with neurodivergent condtions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Impact for people with neurodivergent conditions
```

Due to the interaction of other characteristics (experience level and job role), it was challenging to identify the causes of the behaviour of people with conditions.

In some aspects, people with conditions had a better experience and in some areas it was worse, but this was also associated with their experience level, and whether or not they were a content designer.

> People with conditions were almost exclusively the people talking about the amount and presentation of the information on the ‘Edit question routes’.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
People with conditions were almost exclusively the people talking about the amount and presentation of the information on the ‘Edit question routes’ page.
```
